Deep Learning-based Volumetric Image Registration at Cellular Resolution for Multi-round Fluorescence Microscopy
Multi-round and multi-channel fluorescence microscopy enables the high dimensional imaging of multiple biomarkers in the same biological specimen, e.g., whole mouse brain, to construct a profound cell atlas, enhancing analytical capability but also introducing significant nonlinear deformations across imaging rounds. Image registration is essential for correcting deformations among multi-round fluorescence images and serves as a prerequisite for further quantitative analysis. However, high accuracy and high precision volumetric image registration of multi-round fluorescence images remains unsolved due to the lack of high-quality datasets and dedicated methods. To address these challenges, we acquired multi-round three-dimensional (3D) fluorescence microscopic images of cellular nuclei of the whole mouse brain and constructed mRnd3D-μ, the first fluorescence microscopy registration dataset of its kind as our best knowledge. The dataset, built through a standardized pipeline involving image reconstruction, normalization, and manual annotation, captures complex nonlinear deformations across rounds and serves as a valuable benchmark for image registration algorithm development. With this dataset, we systematically evaluated several state-of-the-art registration methods and further proposed a novel U-shaped deep learning network with integrated deep supervision modules, termed DSU-net. By introducing deep supervision on multi-level decoder features, DSU-net improves the network’s ability to capture both local and global structural information, and implements three rounds whole mouse brain microscopic data registration at single-cell resolution. We further validate the effectiveness and precision of DSU-net through comprehensive evaluations using multiple similarity metrics and comparisons of average nuclear displacement with other registration methods. DSU-net outperforms both traditional iterative and existing non-iterative approaches in terms of registration precision.
